hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye I never like gave orders I never
had to say hey everyone here's what
we're doing we're doing this I never had
to say that the caveat is we're in a
gunfight and you know I need you to take
your element over that and even then
it's a strong suggestion because I might
say Jordan take that building over there
you might look back at me and say
negative mhm the reason you're saying
that to me is because there's something
that you see that I don't see so the
idea of barking orders and that that
that idea that the military or any
organization can be run through
authoritarian dictatorship look you can
make it work for a little while but it's
not a long-term solution and that's what
that's what we've got to watch out
[Music]
for
hello everybody I have Joo willink here
with me today um most of you watching
and listening will know who Joo is he's
U ex Navy
SEAL very Broad Social Media
following uh talented author of
children's books an
entrepreneur we've spoken a number of
times in the past and that's always gone
really well the concl clusions that he's
drawn as a consequence of his vast
experience in the military and on the
entrepreneurship front dovale very well
with what I've learned as a consequence
of working as a clinician and a
professor and in the entrepreneurial
space over all these
decades we talked about
leadership and
ethics
and I would say about Invitational
leadership and ethics and
and fleshed out a landscape of
description about
leadership that makes it not so much a
matter of top down command and order but
of bottom up formulation of shared
vision and shared goals supplemented by
continual communication and we also
talked a lot about the pleasure of
mentorship which is a form of fatherhood
I would say and the fact that
people men particularly in relationship
to fatherhood have a vested interest and
instinctual tilt towards developing the
best in other people and that that's a
much better way of viewing the manner in
which proper hierarchies are structured
than one that relies on the assumption
that people are fundamentally motivated
by power you know maybe the best of us
is motivated by the opportunity to serve
the best in other people and I really
think that that's a possibility and I
would say that's also a Hallmark of
joo's style and
message well Mr willing let's start by
talking about your
tour so when were you on tour a few
months ago I went on tour this was the
second tour that I did and the first one
I did was right at the beginning of
covid right before covid in fact I may
have been the super spreader of Co oh
yeah probably because I did San
Francisco New York
La DC I was like in all the places where
eventually covid spread really quickly
and I had been to all of them and who
knows you helped us get over it quicker
that's how I would look at it you're
welcome yeah yeah yeah so this one was a
few years later and I just did five or
six cities this time and what was nice
was we the one that was in Chicago we
brought a crew in and we filmed it and
we're going to release it so when is
that coming out I'm not sure yet I'm not
sure that all the editing and everything
isn't done yet but we'll put it out
there so why do you think people and
what do people tell you why do people
come and see you what is it that you're
providing to people do you
think I think people want to come see me
and want to connect with me in real life
because they've listened to my podcast a
lot yeah so I think that has a lot to do
with it and then I think people you know
I'm just up there sort of Shar sharing
experiences that I've
had and I try and do the best I can and
presenting the lessons that I've learned
and really one of the biggest lessons
that I was talking about on this tour
was it's going to be okay and and and I
think that especially when people go
through traumatic situations obviously I
I deal with veterans a lot law
enforcement and the the whole PTSD that
people have been going through and
talking about for the last well I guess
since the wars have been on last 20
years and a lot of times someone would
go through traumatic experience and
they'd have bad feelings about it they
they'd have regrets about it they'd have
things that they wish they would have
done differently
and one of the main themes I was telling
people during this tour was that's
totally normal and it's okay it's okay
to
think oh I I lost some friends and
sometimes I feel sad about it well yeah
of course MH like that's that's that's
normal that's fine in fact if you
weren't sad about it there may be
something wrong because I think that
people have been told for a while that
oh if you're feeling sad there's
something wrong with you when I actually
don't think there's anything wrong with
when you feel sad you feel sad yeah you
lost friends you're going to feel sad oh
you were in combat you had to do some
horrible things you did some things that
you regret there's nothing wrong with
that people make mistakes people think
don't turn out the way that they wanted
them to we made decisions and there was
a bad result at the end of that decision
and instead of thinking oh I'm a
terrible person no it's like you made a
mistake and that's okay and you got to
move on yeah well that that's a that's
the tricky part I think with regards to
say post-traumatic stress disorder or
regret you know because it's it's one
thing if you're sad because you've lost
people it's another thing if you're
blaming yourself because you believe
believe and maybe with some cause that
you've made a mistake and often people
don't know what to do about the fact
that they've made a mistake so maybe we
could talk about that a little bit
because some of the people who are
watching and listening will have made
mistakes and some of them are hanging
themselves out to dry because of it
right I mean especially if you make
mistakes that have had Fairly dramatic
consequences so and this ties in I would
say also to the motif of forgiveness
because there's not difference between
forgiving other people and forgiving
yourself and you can't just do that by
saying that you're going to do it so
what I've observed clinically and I
think this works philosophically as well
is that what you want to do to set
things right which is to atone is to lay
out what you've done that you think was
wrong provide yourself with the best
possible defense so you know there's a
reason in our legal system that we start
start with the presumption of innocence
which is a miracle cuz like tyrannies
start with the presumption of guilt and
the reason they do that is because
everyone's done something wrong and if
you dig around enough in anyone's life
you'll find a reason that they're
culpable a reason to put them away and
so the fact that we presume innocence is
a complete bloody miracle and I can't
figure out how we ever manag to get that
right but you got to do that with
yourself so imagine you're taking
yourself to task because you did some
things wrong it's like okay list them
out in your imagination or write it down
but then you got to defend yourself as
thoroughly as you possibly can which
doesn't mean you're trying to get
yourself off the hook it means that
you're trying not to take yourself apart
more than is necessary and then you
might ask well if I've done something
terrible maybe what's necessary is that
I commit suicide is that like I pay the
ultimate price for my sins and people
will do that when they're depressed and
that's not right because actually what
you want to do to atone is to set
yourself back on the right track so the
precondition for forgiving yourself is
first of all to sort out whether or not
you're accusing yourself too viciously
like a tyrant but then let's assume that
there's some
leftover evidence compelling evidence
that you did do something wrong okay now
you have to figure out what you did
wrong and you have to figure out what
you would have done differently and what
you will do differently in the future
and then my sense is and I think this
works out psychologically is that if you
can set yourself up so that you've
learned from the mistake you made so you
wouldn't repeat it then you get to go on
with your life and I think that's the
that's also what you do with people
around you you know I mean you might
want to forgive someone maybe who hurt
you when you were young for example
because you don't want to carry that
burden around you know it's like it's
been 20 years you're still mad about
it's like well you got tortured plus
you're still angry about it so you're
that's not good for you but but to
forgive someone so that you can heal a
relationship means that they have to
confess what they did they have to
assess why it was wrong they have to
come up with an alternative way of
Behaving and then they have to swear you
know by all that's holy so to speak that
they're not going to do that again in
the future and then I think and and you
know you might say that the devil in
your mind that's still accusing you
might say well what you did is so
terrible that you should never be let
off the hook and I would say to that is
that if if that's the criteria that you
use for judgment then everyone's doomed
because everyone makes mistakes in their
lives and I would say probably everybody
makes unforgivable
mistakes and so if if we're going to
take ourselves apart about that
permanently then we're all
rued yeah I I was pretty lucky growing
up in the military that I would get to
see guys and I I I was probably 26 years
old and I moved into like an instructor
role in the SEAL Teams and so you'd see
these young leaders and they' go out on
some training Mission and they would
they were GNA mess things up they're
going to make mistakes and you know you
always get this talk about well you you
made the best decision you could with
the information that you had at the time
and it kind of sounds like a cop out in
a way but yeah it's actually not a cop
out at all you make the best decision
that you can with the information that
you have at the time like what more can
a human being do than make the best
decision they can with the information
that they had at the time
and when you get more information or
when the results come as they may yeah
that decision that you made might not
have been a good decision it might have
been a bad decision but there's number
number one there's nothing you can do to
change it like it already happened you
made the decision and then I would
always look at the guys and say what was
their intent behind this decision that
they made like why did they do that
because if we can decipher that and
their intent was they wanted to make a
good move to get their guys out of a bad
situation what what more could I want
from a leader than to make a decision
that's doing their best with the
information that they had at the time to
maneuver out of a bad scenario to take
care of their guys there's nothing more
I could hope for so as long as I think
you peel back the onion and you kind of
review what happened you say oh yeah I I
made the decision at this time of course
if I had this other information I change
it but I did what I did the result was
not what I wanted it's not what I
intended here we are and now you can
either beat yourself up or you can say
here's some lessons I've learned from it
and you know this the the first book
that I wrote was called Extreme
ownership the opening chapter of that
was a fratricide that took place where I
was the guy in charge where uh one of my
friendly one of my seals killed a
friendly Iraqi soldier in a terrible
situation and of course you know we
could go back in the hindsight's 2020
and I could have done this and I should
have done this and I should have done
something else and I didn't and that's
on me and so I think you know that
initial part if we're going to talk
about forgiveness the first part of that
is taking ownership to say Yep this was
my call this was my decision this is the
this is the move that I
made that's me it's not anybody else
it's me because the minute you start
saying well this person did that and
this person you know the the enemy did
this we didn't expect that the minut you
start casting blame on other people now
you're I think you're I think you're
lying to yourself and I think that's
going to cause more problems so saying
yes this was the decision I made this is
the information I had at the time it
ended up being a bad decision here was
my intent behind it and I've got to move
forward I if you want to you know I
always talk about you want to learn but
you don't want to dwell if you dwell on
the past if you dwell on the mistakes
you made like you said everybody is just
doomed well so the tricky issue there I
think is
that people who are taking eles apart
they're often conscientious people and
so well they'll say they'll think
they'll assume that taking ownership in
your terms means raking yourself over
the coals and The crucial thing to
establish there is is like well yeah you
have to rake yourself over the coals
until you learn but no more than that
because after that it's
counterproductive is what you're trying
to Foster is Improvement right now and
then in terms of making a case for your
for your innocence that's where analysis
of ignorance is useful you know you said
well and it's a question of conscience
did you make the best use of the
information that you had available at
the time and one answer is well yes but
I had sparse information and then you
have to ask yourself well could have you
been more informed if your eyes would
have been more open that's a willful
blindness issue but it's definitely
worthwhile to when you're making a case
to defend yourself to see how much of
the the sequence of events that resulted
in the unfortunate conclusion was
attributable to situation there's a
there's a classic mistake in in thinking
that people make called the fundamental
attribution error so imagine that you're
driving along on the road and somebody
cuts you off and you say well that's son
of a it's like and then you know
you find two blocks later
that you're in the same situation in
terms of the positioning of the
Automobiles and you cut someone else off
and it's harder to do a situational
analysis than to do a personal
attribution and so people will default
to a personal attribution that son of a
and that can turn around to bite
you because it's difficult when you're
retroactively assessing something you've
done
to to take into account all the
situational factors but that is
definitely something you do if you're
mounting a defense for yourself and
that's part of that presumption of
innocence so we could say if you're
trying to get yourself out of something
like post-traumatic stress disorder we
would say well how would you make the
case for yourself if you began with the
presumption of innocence and that there
were situational factors make the
strongest possible case so you do that
now if there's some residual issues that
you have to contend with like the fact
that you were willfully blind or you
know maybe you weren't protecting your
and maybe you were going for the
promotion because you're more ambitious
than you should be like that that that
speaks to intent but you shouldn't
convict yourself until all the arguments
that are in favor of your innocence have
exhausted themselves right and it is
that is the way that our legal system is
set up and there's a good reason for
that too and then knowing also that
atonement is possible and forgiveness
appropriate when you've learned your
lesson you know and that's also very
useful when you're disciplined children
so for example when my kids were young
and I used to have them sit on the steps
when they were you know acting like
barbarians I should clarify that you
discipline your children when they're
acting in a way that isn't appropriate
for their age in accordance with
universal human judgment so you should
discipline your children when they're
disgracing themselves and the reason you
should do that isn't because they're bad
kids or because it reflects badly on you
or because you're angry but because if
they continue to act that way other
people aren't going to want to have them
around and that's not good for your kids
so you discipline them so I say to my
son for example go sit on the steps till
you can act like a civilized human being
or whatever terminology is appropriate
when he's Young and the rule was well as
soon as you get yourself under
control problem solved well it's the
same with past sins so to speak is if
you failed to hit the target properly
but you figured out why why and now you
know how you would chart your course
differently in the future done you know
and it's also the case
that even most negative emotion that you
experience in relationship to past
memories only emerges because there's a
hole in your adaptive structure so
imagine at some point in the past you
fell in a pit and you don't know how you
got there well that emotion is going to
remain hot and dangerous until you
figure out why you fell in and the
reason that your conscience keeps
torturing you about that is because well
you fell into a hole and you don't know
why and so maybe you'll fall into
another one and so you shouldn't be that
comfortable but if you can figure out
why and you can re-evaluate your aim or
your course so that that isn't going to
happen in the future well even
psychologically your own conscience will
let you off the hook if you've
reconfigured your pathway mhm and so and
you do that well partly by not taking
yourself apart to any great degree all
right so you said that one of the things
that people you think that people you
said there were two reasons you thought
that people were maybe coming to see you
live is they they've been watching your
podcast and they actually wanted to make
more personal contact do you knew meet
and greets and that sort of thing at the
end of the of the I I do it the whole
time like as soon as people start coming
in I just hang out with them and and
then get up on stage and do the show and
then hang out and the the staff at the
place will say how long are you going to
meet with people and I say until
everyone's met with me that wanted me
that wants oh yeah and do you do that is
that do you do that formally or do you
do that in informally informally
informally see at the end of my lectures
we have a formal meet and greet and
people line up and there's a bunch of
reasons for doing that
um there's a ticket increment that's
associated with that so there's a
financial reason and that makes the tour
more rewarding but it's also because
there's so many people that want to do
that formalizing it made it much more
efficient you know because everybody
gets it's not very much time it's only
about 15 seconds probably something like
that but the parameters are pretty
nicely defined and we can we can what
would we say we can provide more people
with what they want doing that and so I
really enjoy that actually I and you
know 15 seconds isn't very long but it's
not nothing and if you're awake you can
have a bit of an interaction with
someone that isn't only surface and
that's also a really interesting
challenge you know to be able to do
that rapidly and efficiently in a way
that's satisfying for everybody who's
involved yeah well the weird thing is is
people come up to me and they say I feel
like I know you yeah right and and I say
you do yeah yeah like you listen to the
podcast there's hundreds and hundreds of
hours of me talking about all this
different stuff and if you listen to all
that you do know yeah right and then I
kind of know you too because we've had
these shared experiences of going
through all these topics together and so
I kind of know you too and so you do
have like a legitimate connection with
people and that's they can come up and
just tell you whatever it is they're
going to tell you and they can ask me a
question in 14 seconds and I'll give
them an answer in 32 seconds and we're
good and they're high five and bro hug
and we're moving on so well that's a lot
of contextual information absolutely I
feel exactly the same way you know and
like you said the the idea that the the
people who are coming have that they
know you that's that's not a falsehood
unless you're being false in your
podcast and I know that you're not false
in your podcast so they actually do they
actually do know you yeah I really I
really enjoy going I really enjoy going
to her how long do you
talk two two and a half hours something
oh yeah oh yeah so so quite a while okay
and I'll do some Q&A in there as well
there'll be some Q&A roll the dice with
the Q&A you never know what you're going
to get we use slido I don't use that
well it's this technology that so
everybody on the screens in the theaters
there's a code and everybody can enter
the code into their phone and it brings
them to the slido site and then they can
ask a question but more importantly they
can upvote the questions and so that's
very helpful because there there's a so
I I talked for 90 minutes about hour 90
minutes something like that and then
Tammy Aggregates the questions from
slido and she asks me the questions and
because everybody can vote it gives us a
chance to sample the audience and it
keeps the it's a good way of organizing
it as well too because the problem with
taking live questions is that people
don't know how to handle the mic and so
no one can hear them and then the
audience starts talking and then you get
people who are just grandstanding who
don't really have a question and slido
has worked extremely well for us for
handling that I guess the only thing I
would can you then call that person out
and have them come up and have them what
you could but on it well we you could I
haven't done that that's not a bad idea
we haven't done that sometimes when you
don't get the context around the
question you need more context give a
good answer yeah definitely so if you
can't do that yeah well you can you can
solve that problem to some degree by
selecting questions in the list of
questions that don't require the
additional context and I guess I solve
that sometimes too by providing you know
what might be a more generally
applicable answer than something that
would be specific to the person there's
something kind of awesome though about
just someone stepping up to the mic and
you don't know what you're going to get
fair enough and it's I I I enjoy that
it's like the no tight rope no no net
tight rope walking right well and well
that's also what I like about the
lectures you know because I Don't
lecture from notes I mean I
prepare beforeand hand and I have a
question or two in mind that I'm trying
to answer but I never use notes and I
think part of the reason that the live
lectures are compelling to people is
because they are they are without a net
they are tight RPP situations and one of
the things I really like about speaking
spontaneously like that is if there's a
question at hand or two questions
they're questions that I seriously want
to investigate and so I'm trying to
investigate them in a new way as I go
and if you do it right you can you can
bring the whole thing to a conclusion
that's like a punchline right and that's
really fun to see if you can orchestrate
that in real time that works on podcast
too what's your batting average on
getting you know if you do if you did a
100 shows how many times do you land
like right where you wanted to land and
you walk off the stage triumphant with a
Grand Slam in the ninth
inning we're experiencing a lot of
global instability as we plunge into
primary season how are you protecting
your family in the midst of all all this
chaos the fact is there is one asset
that has withstood famine Wars and
political and economic upheaval dating
back to Biblical times and that's gold
it's not too late to diversify an old
Ira or 401K into gold and Birch gold
group can help you with that Birch gold
can help you create a wellth thought out
and balanced investment strategy they'll
help you convert an existing Ira or 401K
into an IRA in Gold without paying a
penny out of pocket Di diversify into
gold today just text Jordan to
[Music]
9898917350 healthier again I think it
was I was less consistent when I was
touring in
2018 um because I'll put a lot of balls
in the air and it's like you're going to
see a complex movie you know now and
then you go to a movie and there's 50
things going on and it's like an hour
and a half in and you think is he going
to manage it is he going to tie it all
together and sometimes it's like it
comes together and it's like dead that
was a great movie and sometimes just
some fool thing that happens and leaves
everything hanging um in
2018 more frequently I would get a lot
of things going and then maybe only tie
them three quarters together but in the
last couple of
years the the talks they almost always
cohere I mean sometimes you nail it
right and so those are those are
particularly exciting times
but
batting average is pretty high now so
you and I were talking about being rock
stars you know both of us probably would
have been much better off if we've been
rock and roll Stars so what I do at my
talks is I I make a set list right like
you know the the the old days when I
would go to shows to rock and roll shows
they make a set list and if you could
steal that thing or get a hold of it at
the end of concert you had something
pretty cool right the set list thing so
that's what I do I make a set list I'll
just have like different topics that I'm
GNA talk about and they'll there'll be
some kind of thread but I'm
yeah if you don't if you plan it out too
much it doesn't have the spontaneity
that it that that feels that good yeah
definitely then when you just roll with
it and you got your topics and they're
kind of out there and I'm going to go
talk about these things and I'm going to
try and pull it off at the end and we'll
see where it goes yeah yeah yeah well
it's a lot more exciting to do that
because you don't know where it's going
to go you know that's the wind bloweth
blowing where it listeth right you have
to follow that thread and it also
enables you to really pay attention to
the audience because one of the things
you're doing when you're lecturing when
you're speaking to an audience it's not
lecturing that's the thing it's
different than lecturing because it's
not a set as you said it's not what you
have isn't set a priority when you're
communicating with a
crowd you have to watch to see what's
landing and that's partly what you're
doing there is you're putting yourself
in tune with the spirit of the crowd
because everybody comes there and it's a
particular time and it's a particular
night and there's particular things
going on in the broader political realm
and so everybody's charged in a certain
way and some topics are going to land
more heavily that night than others and
if you really watch the audience members
and you listen for when you get silence
you can feel when you've got the words
matched to the expectation of the
audience properly and then you can track
that thread and you can't do that if you
prepare too much too in too much detail
to begin with so you use topics so I use
questions like I have questions in my
head but then I I also have topics that
I can use they're like Greatest Hits I
suppose in some ways right so that's
that set list idea I was about to ask
you about Greatest Hits because you
gotta some of that crowd probably wants
to hear just the Jordan GRE they want to
hear go off about some lobsters right
well I talked to Douglas Murr about that
too because we've done some events
together which has been very fun but you
know one of the things Douglas pointed
out more explicitly was that if you have
a base of viewers and listeners they
have a certain set of expectations they
want to hear something new but not but
kind of optimally new they want you to
return to themes that they've become
familiar with partly because that's a
good place for them to understand it's
like and it is I think akin to going to
see a concert you want to you want to
hear some new material from your band
but you want to hear some of the things
that you've come to know and love now
why do you want that live exactly well I
think because it it gives the audience
that opportunity to participate in real
time with the unfolding of something
that's ordered and classic and new at
the same time yeah and and you it's it's
live it's real so it's not going to be
an exact replication of what they heard
before there's going to be some Nuance
you're going to take that solo that
guitar solo somewhere a little bit
different every time and they're going
to get to see that yeah well they can
also people can also evaluate then too
if it's the real thing you know like and
I think it's especially true for the
kinds of podcasts that you and I do
which have this kind of motivational and
psychological element to them is people
really want to know it's like you know
am I selling my soul to the devil here
or is this person who they claim to be
you know this is one of the things I've
always been impressed with about people
like Joe Rogan for example is like Rogan
is just exactly who he presents himself
to be like there's there's no and I've
seen the all I've seen the the other
side of that often at political events
you know go to political events I know
the person who's involved
possibly many of the political figures
that I've seen perform have a political
face they're not the same on stage they
have an act a political act you know and
they're different people off stage often
smarter people interestingly enough and
I think more interesting people but
Rogan doesn't have any of that and I
think when people are looking for
motivation
Direction and and uh and and and delving
into personal philosophy they want a
bloody well make sure that the people
that they're listening to are credible
and that's something you can assess more
particularly in a live situation
especially when you're watching people
interact on their feet right because
they don't have that scaffold VC Ras
Swami told me he wouldn't use a
teleprompter during the he swore he
wouldn't use a teleprompter during the
campaign partly because he wanted to
avoid exactly that and I think this is
one of Trump's real strengths too is
that Trump might make mistakes when he
speaks but they're his mistakes you know
and people are willing to cut him a lot
of slack because they're his mistakes
you know and and there's a courage about
that too because there is the
possibility that you'll go you know
spectacularly wrong say something stupid
or fail yeah so you talked about you
talked about intent when people are
analyzing their motivations for their
past conduct for better or worse when
what's your intent in the tour and do
you how do you Orient your intent before
you go on stage
MH so interestingly I had a a woman that
works for me and she's the CEO of one of
my companies Great incredibly impressive
woman named Jamie and she was at one of
these Live Events and I got asked during
the during the Q&A someone said hey why
are you doing this yeah you know and and
she who has hears me speak all the time
she told me afterwards she said when I
got asked that question she wanted to
hear what I was going to say cuz she
never really thought about like why does
he do that cuz she kind of knows my life
situation my financial situation where
I'm at in the world she kind of knows
and she never really thought to ask me
like why are you on tour right now why
are you doing this why aren't you aren't
just relaxing sitting by the what doing
whatever it is you want to do yeah and
she waited for my answer and and my
answer was to try and help people out
that's it I mean at this juncture so why
do okay so let's delve into that a
little bit there's two things you
brought up there that I think are
particularly interesting one is the
automatic assumption on the part of
people who might be asking the question
why that if everyone had their DRS they
would be sitting on a beach relaxing and
like people ask
me I was home visiting my parents
recently and my mother said to me don't
you ever relax
because I was you know I was working
while I was there on all sorts of things
and I said to her I you know I don't
know I'm not that interested in relaxing
like I don't even to some degree I don't
even know what that means like if I'm
tired well I'll sit down you know and
and maybe I'll watch a stupid comedy or
something because that's all that's left
of me you know think tamy and I watch
Legally Blonde the other night and that
was about right cuz I'd been writing all
day you know and it was stupidly funny
yeah right and so fine but as a goal
like my goal is not to relax like that's
not that's I think my goal is to have as
an adventurous a time as I could
possibly manage I've been writing about
the book of Abraham in this new book I'm
writing and Abraham the conception of
God in the book of Abraham is that God
is the voice that calls you to Adventure
and that the the the most the most
devout path is the path with the highest
Adventure yeah I really like that I
really like that because you know your
life is not going to be justified by
satisfaction or satiation that's for
infants there's going to be plenty of
pain and so there's no escape from Pain
and so you might say well if you can't
be satisfied and there's no Escape for
pain from pain then there's no hope but
if if the point is the adventure well
that's just not true then then then the
adventure can justify the pain and the
lack of satiation so you said back to
the Adventure a tour is an adventure but
you said that your Prime motivation is
to help people okay so let's let's dig
into that a bit we could get skeptical
about it's like people might say like
the the postmodernist types the
neo-marxist types would say well that's
just your cover for like your dominance
your your power striving you've made
lots of money you're famous people know
who you are it's like and if because
that's not enough for you you have to
add this overlay oh yeah and by the way
I'm just doing this to help people right
so that's the very cynical attitude but
you can you can understand that that's a
justifiable criticism and if you were
narcissistic it would also be a genuine
criticism so why do you think it is that
you find why do you think your claim
that you're helping people is Justified
and if it's Justified why do you think
that you find helping people
intrinsically
rewarding going back to my career in the
military I think this is where initially
learned this because as you're coming up
in the military you know you're you're
you're going up in the ranks and you're
getting moved into more positions of
responsibility and you're going out and
conducting operations and all those
things that you do inside the military
in your career and what I found more
than anything else was where where I got
gratification what felt like I actually
did something good was when I'd see a
guy that I had worked with that I had
mentored that I had trained when I'd see
them step up and Excel and be able to
achieve things and be able to accomplish
things that was more gratifying than me
doing it
myself and so I think that I I started
to notice that that that's what really
when did you notice that how old were
you
probably
2930 something along those so I was I
was in a leadership position I started
to have people working you know that
that were my direct reports but I
realized oh I can I can really help this
person like they don't know what to do
right and and and inside the military
inside the SEAL Teams it's like there's
a mission that you're going to do and
there's a certain way to conduct that
mission and this person that been doing
this job for three years might not know
that and I knew it and there's not too
many things that you know really well
you go I can I can show you how to do
this yeah and instead of just saying hey
I'm better than you I'm smarter than you
I can show you how to do this you can
follow my lead instead of having that
attitude it's an attitude of like hey
you're going to be just as capable as I
am at some point I can help you along
way more even yeah this that's the goal
is to make them more and this is
something that comes from Jiu-Jitsu as
well in Jiu-Jitsu if you and I train
Jiu-Jitsu and we' both been training the
same amount of time sure it'll come down
to like who's bigger and stronger
but I realized hey there's always
someone that's going has been training
longer than me and they're going to be
able to beat me that doesn't make them a
better human being than me it just means
that they've been training longer for me
and that applies to just about
everything right so if the the the skill
of being a seal and planning a mission
oh I might be better at you better than
you right now but over time I should be
able to train you and you should be able
to like you said get better than I am
and so I felt that that left the biggest
Mark yeah on my on my soul of being able
to help people out and then when I got
out of the military and I started kind
of teaching the same leadership
principles that I had
learned and then I started getting that
same feedback and then with writing kids
books like that was a whole new level
when you have a kid that comes up and
says hey I did my first pullup or I I I
got an A on my my math test or I learned
all my time stables and the parents like
have tears in their eyes saying thank
you there there's nothing better than
that so okay so so you know so I think
that's actually true I do think there's
nothing better than that and so i' be
I've been trying to take that apart
because that's a relatively radical
claim so you could
imagine you can imagine the attractions
of Hedonism and so everybody has their
base desires and I would say base for a
variety of reasons they you know lust
anger those are good examples they want
what they want right bloody well now and
there's some gratification to be had in
obtaining that now the problem with
right now is it's sort of to hell with
other people and to hell with the future
and so maybe that's not an optimized
path this is why Hedonism per se is a
dysfunctional
orientation it reduces everything to the
moment and then it reduces everything to
the whim inside the individual so
there's no future there's no time and
there's no other people okay Power
there's another example it's like well I
could go for power I could compel and
force other people to do what I want for
my gratification obviously regardless of
what they want why shouldn't I do that
if I could do it you know and cultures
like ancient Rome cultures that are
predicated on the notion that might
makes right they're predicated on the
idea that well if you can do it you
should and the the fact that you can and
would makes you better like by
definition if I can force someone to do
what I want them to do and they can't
resist then why shouldn't I just be
contemptuous of them and I think the
answer to that is or backfires it's like
you can enforce your will on people for
a while but even among chimpanzees the
probability that the moment you turn
your back or show any weakness that
you're going to get torn into pieces is
extremely high so so Hedonism power
those are sort of alternative
motivational States well this one this
this pleasure in helping other people
develop i' think well why shouldn't we
think that that's just your cover story
and I think the reason for that is well
here's one reason you human beings are
parir bonding creatures and our children
are dependent longer than The Offspring
of any organisms so there's two Pathways
to reproduction there's two patterns of
natural world reproduction there's the
mosquito pathway these have technical
names can't remember one is K I can't
remember the technical names mosquitoes
on the one end human beings on the other
so the
mosquito strategy is a million Offspring
and if
999,000 of them die as long as one
survives or two you've done your job no
investment past sex right and they're
human beings who have that strategy as
well no investment past sex right the
alternative is immense investment maybe
multigenerational investment that's
parenting grandparenting great
grandparenting maybe the establishment
of a pattern that even works beyond
that human beings have Stak their
existence on the high investment
reproductive strategy and so to the
degree that we're
biologically prepared to be
fathers there's an instinct for
mentoring and I think that what you're
describing is the broader scale
manifestation of exactly that now you
tied these things together you know you
said you discovered when you were young
that helping other people
develop was a great intrinsic pleasure
and you said maybe the most rewarding
of the intrinsic pleasures and I I
really do believe that's true it's quite
stunning to to realize that my graduate
Supervisor was a very great guy he's
still alive Robert Peele and Bob was a
really good professor and he got a lot
of Joy from lecturing he was a really
good researcher a good administrator
like Bob had it all going and still the
thing he felt that he took most pleasure
in across the entire expanse of his
career was helping his graduate students
in particular develop their care he was
very generous at that and of course it
paid back to him immensely because it
turns out if you share ideas you
generate more ideas because the ideas
get rewarded and if you help other
people develop their career they tend to
you know it reflects very B positively
on on you there's a there's a saying in
the SEAL Teams if you take care of your
gear your gear will take care of you
meaning if you take care of your
parachute and you prepare it you pack it
correctly when you pull your rep cord it
will open or your dive gear when you're
underwater if you prepared it and you've
maintained it correctly you can breathe
underwater which are really you don't
die and you don't
die starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million ORD
stage Shopify is there to help you grow
our marketing team uses Shopify every
day to sell our merchandise and we love
how easy it is to add more items ship
products and track conversions Shopify
helps you turn browsers into buyers with
the internet's best converting checkout
up to 36% better compared to other
leading Commerce platforms no matter how
big you want to grow Shopify gives you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level
sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jvp well I The Twist that I put on that
was if you take care of your people your
people will take care of you and that's
absolutely true even what you're just
talking about with Bob because Bob
invested he took care of you and and
look could we again could we play the
the the Jordan game on this thing where
maybe he was just doing that knowing
that in the long run you know all those
all those favors were going to come back
of that'd be a really longterm strategy
and it'd be kind of a gut check to put
up with all these miserable graduate
students this whole time where you're
just kind of putting chips on the table
hoping that these Investments would pay
off I I also think too that at some
point you you have to flip the
definition if your strategy is
short-term gratification that's one
thing but if your strategy is
long-term
Mutual reinforcement and development
even if you can see that that's of
benefit to you if you're the sort of
person that was only doing that because
it was of benefit to you you'd revert to
the short term immediately Y and so at
some point you can't be if it's a long
enough term investment strategy there's
no being cynical about it anymore
because the the the details of the
strategy obviate the necessity for the
for the cynicism so I've been writing
about the gospels and there's there's uh
Christ one of
Christ's what would you say Commandments
is to lay up Treasures in Heaven that do
not rust where that moths cannot destroy
and nor nor and robbers cannot steal and
rust cannot devour Treasures in Heaven
and so I've been trying to parcel parse
through exactly what that means so it
means to live in the light of Eternity
first of all so it means to view
everything you do in the
moment as extending as if it extended
infinitely throughout time so it's so
Kant the philosopher Kant have this
categorical imperative you want to don't
do anything that you wouldn't want
people to do if it if it was distributed
widely the biblical especially in the
gospels you see this but it's it's more
sophisticated it's like everything you
do should be the sort of thing that
would work if everyone did it over the
longest possible time with the most
number of situations simultaneously
addressed so this notion of laying up
treasure in heaven where it doesn't rust
and where it can't be stolen it really
looks to me like it refers to something
like reputation because you might say
well where is the safest place to store
your wealth and the answer to that is
it's not in money because money can
inflate for example and it can be stolen
there's all sorts of ways you can lose
it the safest place to store your wealth
is in your reputation and the most
effective way of developing your
reputation is to be of the most service
you can possibly be to other people you
know and so when we're on tour when
Tammy and are on tour we're thinking
well this is a pretty good deal you know
we put this effort into it but it's
returned thousands of fold right because
now you have people who are so happy
with what you've done that they're
thrilled to have you around and so
that's a pretty damn good deal and so
it's it's it's this perverse uniting of
selfish
selflessness
with what would you say with genuine
reward yeah the luck that it just so
happens that if you take care of other
people and you sacrifice for them and
you invest in them it just so happens
it'll come back to you yeah it just so
happens that it is the best possible
strategy that you could undertake yeah
yeah and I think there's I think there's
no doubt about that and I I also really
wonder you know what the limit to that
is because
it's obviously the case that so so
here's another you tell me what you
think about this here's another form of
fundamental reward if you've gone out of
your way for someone let's say so you
made sacrifices for them and then you
see that that really helped them and
they let you know that that really
helped them that's a really that's a
moving moment you know and I'm sure
you've encountered that many times where
people will come up to you say during
the lectures of the tours and they'll
say here's something you said because of
something you learned and here's how it
helped me and you think like that
strikes a very deep chord and that is
one of the things that well for us
anyways for Tammy and I that's certainly
one of the things that makes the tour
worthwhile but it does speak to that
depth of motivation in mentorship and
this is a very
effective this is something very useful
to know in the culture war that we're
engaged in because the accusation of the
radical metam Marxist Types on the left
is that there's no other motivation than
power right no matter what anybody says
it's all about power and power is the
ability to compel and use Force but this
strategy this isn't the power strategy
right this is a distribution of power
strategy it's like you're genuinely
acting in the other person's best
interest yeah and if that's also also
allied with an instinct that makes that
deeply meaningful and that's the
Instinct of fatherhood as far as I'm
concerned it just makes a complete
bloody mockery of the claim that the
only fundamental human motivation is
power yep and and going back to a
leadership perspective
yeah what I actually want as a leader is
you I don't have to do anything because
you've stepped up and now you're running
everything and I I can look up and out
and move on yeah that's number one and
number two and I'd be interested in your
opinion on this I tell people all the
time that intent has a smell intent has
a smell so
if you if your intent is actually to
take advantage of me and you know get
things from me and you're taking
advantage of my mentorship and you're
eventually going to that intent will
have a smell and sometimes it's hard
sometimes you meet someone and you go
man that seems a little bit off this
person seems a little bit off I'm not
really sure about this person and I
think in my in my mind that's their
intent it's seeping through you can
smell it and if you you got to watch out
for that and I always have to remind
people that there are there are terrible
people out there there are there snakes
that I will invest in you and invest in
you and invest in you and what you'll do
at the end of that is you'll take it and
and or turn it against me you bet and if
I would say this that that is an
absolute possibility it can absolutely
happen but if you invest in 10 people
nine of them are going to give back to
you and you'll be in a better place one
person will try and run away and they'll
eventually unfortunately for them
they'll dig themselves a hole they can't
get out we also know that too
so Psychopaths take advantage of other
people they use power and so for someone
who's truly Psychopathic you're nothing
but a set of opportunities for
short-term gain but the problem with
being a psychopath is that they have the
same attitude towards themselves so
they'll sacrifice well relationships
obviously which is the future to a large
degree they'll sacrifice their own
future to take advantage in the moment
and the consequence of that is they
don't it's not a strategy designed for
Success you know you hear all this that
there's all these psychopaths in
positions of of power and authority it's
like most of the time like the the real
hardcore psychopaths are very very
likely to end up in prison but even the
ones who fool some of the people some of
the time or even all of the people some
of the time the chickens come home to
roost it is not an effective strategy
you know and this has even been
documented among chimpanzees so now and
then in chimpanzee troops you get a
leader who's a leader a dominant male
who's risen to the top because of force
fundamentally but those troops are not
very functional and his leadership is
very unstable and as I mentioned earlier
he's very likely to meet a dreadful end
and so that's another problem with the
the claim that power is the only true
motivation is that if you first of all
as you said only about it's actually
about one in 20 people who use it
reliably as their fundamental motivation
so the rate of psychopathy narcissism
Etc it starts to reach clinical
proportions in about one person in 20 so
19 out of 20 people that you help will
respond in kind that's a good investment
it is a good is a great investment
that's right that's right usually not
that hard to figure out I mean it might
take a little bit of time before you
realize oh this person's definitely
looking out for themselves more than
anybody else that's going to be and you
said that has a smell so one of the
things I've been working out with this
character Jonathan pageo is so there's
these there's an ancient
idea imagine there's a pyramid of values
okay and there's a pinnacle value and in
the Egyptian formulations the Pinnacle
value was Horus the ey which is the
capacity to pay attention which I really
like it's
like everything should be subordinated
to your capacity to actually pay
attention to watchy but you could think
about that ability to watch as the thing
that's at the top or you could think
about it as something that operates at
every is at the top and operates at
every level so the idea would be that if
you pick a principle to guide Yourself
by maybe it's the principle of self of
short-term
self-promotion that's going to be your
guiding star but it's going to leak out
in absolutely everything you do every
every word you say every gesture you
manifest is going to speak of that and
people are pretty good good at decoding
non-verbal behavior and that smell is
associated with that pattern of
short-term selfish gratification and
you're right with repeated
interactions there's something off a you
can tell and other people can tell too
which is another reason why that
Psychopathic pattern of of
adaptation doesn't work socially and and
it doesn't even work for the person
that's applying it it's perverse
because an active psychopath might be
better off than someone who's so
paralyzed by depression and anxiety that
they they can't move right because like
a psychopathic attitude that's
self-serving can take you out into the
world and it's also unfortunately the
case that it can if Psychopathic men who
are narcissistic have a reasonably good
track record at fooling women because
Psychopaths mimic
competence and they do that by having
false conf confidence and women use
confidence as a marker for competence
but you can gain confidence and that's
what Psychopaths and narcissists to you
know they think they know they actually
believe that they know more than they
know partly because they have such a dim
view of everyone else and that can give
them a Glitz and a and an aura of
confidence that and what you see in the
clinical literature is that works
particularly well with the younger the
woman the more effective that is because
they're just not very they're not
experienced they can't tell the gastons
from the you know from the exactly
Gaston is a perfect example of that and
and I always try and explain that to
people that the one of the worst
situations you can be in is when you
think that the little moves that you're
making no one can see them and it's so
obvious everybody else everybody else
that's watching can see exactly what
you're doing you think oh they can't
they can't see the Maneuvers that I'm
making to take care of myself no they
see everybody sees and it ends up
destroying you so that that idea of like
what you talked about imposing my will
on other people you get away with that
for a little while if I'm the boss and I
can fire you or I can give you punitive
measures because you didn't follow my
orders that'll work for a little while
but it's not a long-term solution and
eventually you're going to have a mutiny
on your hands you're probably going to
end up they they actually had a name for
it in the Vietnam War right we would
frag you you're my officer you're
imposing my your will on me you're not
listening to what we have to say cool
we're going to frag you we're going to
get into a gunfight at night you're
going to get shot by one of us they had
a name for it yeah that's like The
Chimps you're talking about that that's
it goes across the board to all of us
primates out there well so so you can
see how deep that goes because again the
postmodern neo-marxist claim is that
human hierarchies are predicated on
power right and I already defined Powers
the willingness and ability to use force
and compulsion it's not ability forget
that that's not power ability is the
ability to get things done power is the
willingness and and ability to use Force
okay you say well you can organize
hierarchies around Force that's what a
totalitarian state is but but your point
is dead relevant it's like well that
works fine except when it doesn't work
and then it doesn't work at all and I
don't believe at all that the the
functional hierarchies that men organize
they're if they're predicated on see PJ
Jean P the developmental psychologist
delved into this too he said there's
another problem with a hierarchy that's
built on power so let's say we've got an
organization here that's top down
command it's like you do what I say or
there's going to be trouble right and
there's another organization beside it
and that is so more here's the vision
I'm going to aggregate a bunch of people
who are on board with that right so
they're doing it voluntarily now those
are the sort of people to whom you can
distribute the kind of responsibility
that you described earlier so you want
people around you that don't need you
around right as you build an
organization and you might say well I
don't want to seed all that control that
means you're power mad but the advantage
to you is if you build those people
underneath you who are competent in
their own realm you can keep moving your
ambition higher and higher because you
build this platform beneath you that's
composed of competent people and all
that happens is your expansive
opportunity increases okay so PJ's
observation was this there's costs to
the power oriented hierarchy the cost is
you demoralize the participants because
they're not chasing something they value
except under duress and you have to
discipline you have to monitor and
discipline them constantly and that's a
cost so if you put system a power-based
and system B voluntary based right
Vision based let's say in a head-to-head
competition the voluntary organization
will always eventually Stomp the power
based and I think that's exactly right y
um
you know when you go to these Live
Events and you get asked questions and
and I got asked a question and it just
kind of led to a whole thought process
but somebody you know asked me well how
do how do I get people to listen to me
you know I'm in a leadership position
how do I get people to listen to me and
I said if you want people to listen to
you you need to listen to them it's the
opposite of what people think you know
it's not talk louder if I want you to
listen to me if I want if I want you to
listen to me I need to listen to you and
that kind of opened up this whole idea
for me there's a whole there's a whole
category of these things right if I want
you to respect me what do I have to do I
have to treat you with respect yeah if I
want to have influence over you what do
I have to do I actually have to allow
you to influence me I have to open my
mind up and allow you to influence me if
I just stick with my own ideas you're
you're you close your mind as well if I
have a closed mind you're gonna close my
mind um if I want you to care about me
what do I have to do I have to care
about you and by the way in my opinion
these are the components of a
relationship right definely if we listen
to each other we have if we don't listen
to each other we don't have a
relationship yeah if we don't respect
each other we don't have a relationship
if we're not influenced by each other we
don't have a relationship so if we don't
care about each other obviously we don't
have a relationship so when you want to
build a relationship what do you have to
do you have to listen to the other
person by the way this applies to your
employees it applies to your kids it
applies to your your spouse it applies
to everyone if you want them to listen
to you you have to listen to them and
you you can't just you know I'll stop
talking as I prepare my counter for what
you're saying right now it's like I'm
literally going to listen to what you
have to say and try and open up my mind
and open up my perspective so that I
understand your world as as well as I
possibly can I'm going to integrate that
into what my thoughts are and we're
going to come to an understanding we're
going to move forward with a better
solution this is why when I was in the
military I I never like gave orders I
never had to say hey everyone here's
what we're doing we're doing this I
never had to say that yeah never had to
say that oh the caveat is wearing a
gunfight and you know I need you to take
your element over that and even then
even then it's a strong suggestion
because I might say Jordan take that
building over there you might look back
at me and say
negative I don't say hey shut up you
insubordinate bastard you no the reason
you're saying that to me is
because there's something that you see
that I don't see
that's the other thing trust right how
do I get you to trust me I have to put
trust in you so the idea of barking
orders and that that that idea that the
military or any organization can be run
through authoritarian dictatorship look
you can make it work for a little while
but it's not a long-term solution and
that's what that's what we've got to
watch out for yeah well what one of the
things I've read in relationship to
military history and this is
particularly true with regards to the US
is that part of the reason that the US
Military has been such a formidable
force is that a fair bit of
responsibility is devolved down the
ranks is that people
are
expected
to use their decision-making power as
appropriate with the maximal amount of
allowable Freedom at their level of
authority and you can imagine why that's
much better because it's the same thing
it's the it's the free market equivalent
in the military if there's a thousand
people and some of them are troops that
are on the front line some of those
people on the front line are going to
have much more accurate information than
the people who are aggregating
information at a distance both
temporally and spatially so you want
to you want to open yourself up to being
informed by people who have skin in the
game and have their eyes open in the
immediate
circumstance I've seen this with great
political leaders like the great
political leaders that I've met are very
very good at listening and partly what
they do even when they're campaigning so
I met this guy Preston Manning he
started a political party in Canada and
out of nothing now he came from a
political family so he had some
connections but he basically produced a
political party in Canada from ground
zero and they became the official
opposition right and then it eventually
merged with the current conservative
party so it was a western party and a
populist party populist but I asked him
at one point well how how the hell do
you do that because that's really hard
and he said he went from Arena to Arena
across western Canada and he'd give his
stump speech but what he really liked
were the questions and the answers the
q&as because people would tell him what
their problems were so you can imagine
if you're a political leader and you go
talk to a thousand people and all
thousand people tell you their problem
problems because you
listen well now you've got the questions
right because one of the things that's
really impossible to figure out if
you're a leader is like well what
problem are we trying to solve here what
direction should we be going in and it's
a lot easier to lead people in a
direction that they want to go and so if
you listen to people now Jimmy Carr told
me the same thing about him preparing
his comedy routines before he goes on
tour so and comedians do this generally
and they all know this although car was
very good at elucidating
it you go to 50 small clubs you try out
your idiot material you know 90% of it
falls flat but 10% of it makes people
laugh well if you're listening you can
tell when they laugh and you just put a
check by that joke and after you've done
30 shows and you now have two hours of
material that makes people laugh even if
you're not that damn funny to begin with
if you pay enough attention to what what
the audience responds to you can
aggregate the material and you can go on
the road and that's really as far as I
can tell that really is the essence of
leadership per se it's certainly the
essence of political leadership yeah
well this is the fourth law of combat
leadership that I used to teach in the
SEAL Teams that now I teach to
corporations and companies and teams
decentralized command it's everything
you just said decentralized command I
want my subordinate leadership to be
leaders yeah I want them to understand
where we're going and I don't really
care how they get there and I can put
some parameters on them hey you can't do
this you can't do that but everything
else inside that box you can do make
decisions go make things happen that's
decentralized command and yeah that's
why we have a great military and when we
get away from that is when we start
having problems that's why you hear
about the Vietnam War what was happening
during the Vietnam war well you had
Johnson back in DC making decisions
about what targets we were going to hit
in Vietnam that's no way to run a war
and that's why you have problems in
those situations so definitely
decentralized command as as a leadership
system it's really vastly Superior to
any other system and that's why that
that group that pulls ahead and the
other thing that you talk about that
group that's based on values and based
on really to me relationships it's the
same thing right if I have a team and we
all get along and and we all can talk to
each other we trust each other we care
about each other you put that team
against a team that has a bunch of
animosity and they don't trust each
other the team that has good
relationships is going to annihilate
we see this over and over again in the
world we saw it in thees in fact this is
funny in aun so I was running the
Advanced Training for the seals where
you're getting seal platoon ready
they've already gone through all the
basic training you've got experienced
seals some new seals but experienced
seals and some newer seals but they're
getting ready to go on
deployment and it's a very strenuous
arduous training cycle and you're pretty
much training them some collective
skills but then you're putting them in
Mission scenarios where they're going to
go out and
do simulated combat
missions and as soon if you would see a
fracture between guys in the platoon
you'd watch it you'd pay attention and
if it started to get worse the platoon
was going to fall apart like the platoon
that occasionally would fail a block of
training they fail land Warfare they'd
fail Urban combat or they'd fail Close
Quarters combat the reason they would
fail was because they had fissures in
the platoon that would break them apart
well how would those fissures develop
ego okay so are they're developing
around people who are playing power
games y so you're the platoon Chief so
in a seal platoon the platoon Chief's
probably been in for 12 to 15 years he's
got a lot of tactical experience and
then you've got the platoon Commander
who's an officer he probably has four
five years he's a little less tactically
experienced but he's the guy that's
overall in charge right he's the guy
that actually is the the the head of the
platoon so a good platoon Chief is going
to offer suggestions and a good platoon
officer is going to go yep chief that
makes sense yeah yeah that's a beautiful
thing and everyone can kind of see that
the platoon Chief is sort of running the
platoon with the with the permission of
for lack of a better word the permission
of the platoon Commander well casionally
you get a platoon Commander that wants
everyone to know that he's the one
that's making the decisions yeah and he
starts a woman we're not going to do it
that way and right there you got
friction or it can be the other way
around it can be the platoon chief that
wants everyone to know that hey we're
going to do it my way and the platoon
Commander doesn't want to do that's cuz
he's an idiot and you just end up with
this explosion well that's that
narcissism that idea that you want to be
the one that people know did it yes
right that's a big problem right because
then you're doing it because you want to
be known right and that's a false form
of prestige right and the narcissistic
types are always after the false forms
of prestige like real Prestige comes
when people know that you're good at
delivering something they want to have
delivered right that's and that's the
well that's the equivalent of real
ability and so there there's there's
something else that's I think we can tie
together what we talked about to begin
with
so here's how kids develop friendships
so two kids will start interacting with
each other on the playground right say
they're like four years old a boy and a
girl and the boy proposes some possible
play topics so that could be a game or
it could be like a drama so kids will
pretend so maybe the boy will say um do
you want to play house okay now he
doesn't say to the girl you have to play
house because then if she does play it's
not going to be any fun plus she isn't
going to play and she's going to be
looking for an escape or some other kid
to play with like instantly so it has to
be an invitation right and then they
have to jointly negotiate the role you
know cuz if you're playing house you
could play husband and wife or you could
play you know husband and daughter or
there's all sorts of different roles or
you could play two sons or one of you
could be the cat like there's a lot of
rules that can be taken and the next
rule is both kids have to agree on the
rules and they have to want to play and
play is particularly interesting in this
regard because if it's if there's any
element of compulsion if there's or fear
the the fun stops it's a very delicate
motivation State play because any other
motivational state will take it out so
you have to do it exactly right to get
the spirit of play going so if the boy
does this well then he'll play this game
with the girl and it'll be fun for both
of them and then so then you imagine
there's a fairly tight set of
constraints that are operating to make
that game fun for both volunteerism
being one of them they have to pick
their roles they have to share their aim
they have to agree on what the game is
going to be they have to agree on the
principles so then they can play the
game game and now they're experimenting
with communicating with one another
within that framework okay now if that
goes well they'll end and they'll say
well that was fun and they'll say you
know would you like to play again okay
so now what you're having is a sequence
of games right and a friend is someone
that a sequence of games can be played
with a variety of different games and
that's a relationship so now imagine
that you know they're pretty tight
constraints on how you have to play a
game to make the game
F you have to have a goal you have to
try to make the goal you have to compete
because you want to do a good job maybe
even want to do a better job than the
person you're playing with and you have
to cooperate because you have to stay
within the confines of the game okay so
that's pretty tight set of constraints
now imagine that across a set of games
the constraints are even tighter because
now you have to be able to do that
flexibly in a bunch of different
situations with a bunch of different
games with the same person and they have
to want to continue it okay that's a
friendship now imagine that there's a
pattern of behavior that makes that an
attitude that makes that more possible
okay that's an ethical attitude and
there's nothing morally relativistic
about that you can see that right
because the imagine that you have a
friend and it's it's fun to play chess
with him and it's fun to play basketball
right well there's not a lot of
commonality between those two games but
there's a commonality of attitude that
can be brought to bear across those
games and that's the principle that's
antithetical to power and I think that
what you're doing when you're mentoring
people is you're teaching them how to
play that game that long-term iterative
game and the pleasure in that you
imagine it's an instinct the people who
were best at that had the children who
thrived because they taught their
children how to play games that
everybody wanted to play so that they
were always being called upon to play
and so that that was a radically
effective reproductive strategy
effective enough to become an instinct
and an instinct that's so powerful that
it makes itself manifest as that
pleasure in mentoring that you described
yeah right and and that thing you when
you mentioned about these people you
want to interact with even when you're a
little kid it's trust listen respect
influence and care right if if if you
and I are going to play a game together
but you're just imposing your rules on
me I'm not going to like it or you don't
listen to any of the input that I want
to give I'm not GNA not going to play
with you anymore if I can see that you
don't care that I'm the one that keeps
falling down on the ground every time we
do this part of the game you don't care
about me I'm this isn't going to last
very long and in order for us to build a
relationship you got to give this stuff
you got to give that trust you got to
listen to what other people have to say
what about uh also Psychological
reactants have you ever heard of this no
so what I guess it's some uh some
Instinct that human beings have that
when we get told to do something there's
some level of we don't really want to do
what we've been told to do and and
that's especially true for disagreeable
people by the way and men are more
likely to be disagreeable yeah well if
you're
agreeable you're more likely to
cooperate if someone suggests or even
demands and the advantage to that is
well you're more Cooperative but the
disadvantage is the Psychopaths and the
narcissists can have their way with you
and this has been very well modeled like
you can produce say fictional worlds
that are only composed of Cooperators
and they do extremely well but if you
drop one malevolent actor they take
everything if they if all the people can
do is cooperate they take everything a
cult consists of I assume something
along something like that that's right
that's right you got all these people
who are cooperating in one you know one
shark in the middle so the this is
why so in Beauty and the Beast the
beauty falls for the trainable monster
right she doesn't want the narcissist
and she doesn't want the weak men those
are like the dwarfs in Snow White which
is why you can't get rid of the bloody
dwarfs by the way it's like you know the
typical beautiful young woman is
surrounded by dwarfs right and so she's
not interested in them and so then you
might say well who's the prince and then
you could say well one sort of Prince is
Gaston and another sort of Prince
apparently in the beauty and beast Motif
is the trainable monster and you might
say well why do you want the monster and
the answer is well someone's got to keep
the Psychopaths up a right right and
trainable so you want someone who has
the capacity to say no but who can be
enticed and invited into a relationship
like a mentoring relationship and one of
provision cooperation right so it's a
very tight line for women to negotiate
right because if they find a man who's
got no capacity for monstrosity
whatsoever and a monster comes along
he's done but if they pick a guy who's
too monstrous then he can't cooperate
and he's not going to you know be
cooperative with her and the children so
that women have a very very small MH
small eyeh hole in a needle to thread
yeah and then and the reason I make much
of Beauty and the Beast by the way I do
think that's the fundamental female myth
and part of the reason I think that this
is very comical I think so you to meet
the gole boys you ought to meet my wife
and see who she married yeah right right
right well so the comprehensible story
so the Google boys a long while ago got
together and analyzed um female
pornography use online billions of data
points and they identified the core
female pornographic narrative and women
use verbal pornography not visual
pornography right so you can see this
and it's like an erotic harleyquin
romance it's always the same thing
there's five cardinal male figures
surgeon pirate
billionaire werewolf and vampire those
are
common protagonists and the theme
fundamentally is
that this male is attractive to many
other males and is dangerous but can be
enticed into a relationship Across Time
by the right woman it's the Beauty and
the Beast Motif and that's the core
Motif for the vast preponderance of
female pornography like the narrative
theme is being identified it's exactly
what is in 50 Shades of Gray right right
right as I those those when the when the
toxic masculinity started being talked
about a lot and I got asked a bunch
about these things yeah and what what I
answered that question with a lot was
well if you take any characteristic or
any trait of a human and you take it to
an extreme of course it's going to it
doesn't really matter what even
something like being generous like you
know if someone is generous they they're
so generous they give everything away
and they get taken advantage of yeah so
any trait if you take it to an extreme
it'll become a negative and I that be
you know with the traditionally feminine
traits and the traditionally masculine
traits it's the same thing oh it's to
say it's bad to be aggressive or
assertive well yeah can you be too
aggressive and too assertive and now you
don't listen to anybody else you just go
run around slapping people like yes
that's terrible but the other end of the
spectrum is now you're just kind
of complying to the whims of whoever's
in around you're it's an equally bad
scenario so what you want to be as a
human being is is be balanced and and
yeah you got to have some capacity to be
a bit of a monster when you need to be
but you got to be able to contain that
and discipline that and you'll end up in
a pretty good spot and that that goes
with with just about every
characteristic that that a human being
can have well you see this you see this
very clearly in analysis of Personality
trait distribution so you can imagine
that there's advantages being
extroverted but there's disadvantages
impulsivity and there are pathologies
Mania like Mania is a pathology of
extroversion impulsivity as well because
one of the things that positive emotion
does and and extroverts are higher in
positive emotion you think well you
can't have too much of that it's like
yes you can Mania is too much positive
emotion and so is impulsivity because
positive emot Motion makes you much more
likely to act precipitously in the
present because your nervous system is
saying well everything's good right now
make hay while the sun shines and so if
you have a pronounced proclivity for
positive emotion it'll manifest itself
in impulsivity right and so there as you
pointed out there there so you might say
well it seems cosmically unjust that
talents are distributed inequitably but
if you understand that there are no
talents without a corresponding cost
then the situation becomes much more
complex this is even true of
intelligence like I think there isn't
anything that you could be granted by
the genetic Lottery that will make more
of a difference in your life than raw IQ
and a huge part of that is biologically
determined far more than people would
ever want to admit and it's really quite
shocking but the biggest traditionally
the the most unforgivable and deadly sin
has been associated with the intellect
because the intellect is so powerful
that it can fall in love with itself and
then you get the luciferian intellect
essentially you get the sin of Pride you
get arrogance int and intellectual
arrogance is probably the worst kind and
so sure it's great to be smart but the
downside is yeah well you fall in love
with your own intelligence boy and
you're going to be in some sort of
trouble because I don't care how smart
you are you're not smart enough and that
is not the only virtue then you said
something else interesting too you know
you talked about this balance and so
the classical conception of God is
something like the sum of bonum right
the sum of all that's good but I think
that's in some way a misapprehension
that it's more like the harmonious
balance of all that is good right rather
than the sum per se you know and so you
could imagine that a person who's
maximally
admirable has the capacity to bring to
bear whatever temperamental trait is
most appropriate in that situation right
so they've got an array of tools to
choose from which is why becoming
skilled is so useful you increase your
tool what you're well you increase your
the toolbox that you have at hand but
then that virtue itself seems something
like the harmonious balance of
potentially competing virtues maybe
virtue itself is the game that virtuous
traits play it's something like that and
then so you can't reduce it to anyone
thing you can't say well the most
aggressive guy is the best or the most
intelligent guy or the most Cooperative
guy or the best looking guy or any of
that it's not reducible to a single
Dimension no matter what the dimension
is but that doesn't mean that there
isn't
something that all the virtues point to
and I do think too that that pleasure
that makes itself manifest in mentoring
is probably an index of the virtues
being balanced properly right because if
you're in a mentoring relationship with
someone and you're really attempting to
operate let's say not only in their best
interest but in the best interest of all
the people they could serve so like when
I was training graduate students you
know part of what I'm thinking is well
if this person is now under my
supervision and they're going to become
a professor well they're going to
develop a research Enterprise and God
only knows where that'll go like that
can be very influential and they're
going to train they're going to have a
pretty direct influence on at least
thousands of people people and so you
can imagine that you're trying to
work in that person's best interest but
you're trying to work in the best
interests of that person in so far as
that person is going to be willing to
serve the best interests of all the
people that they're going to serve yep
right right and that's something that
you're going to have to develop the feel
for right with these individual human
beings cuz they're all a little bit
different so there might be one
individual that you have to be a little
bit more aggressive to get them
talked leadership
sayols right and it's like wood so
woodworking you've got to learn how to
operate the tools on wood right the saw
and the drill and and and the Chisel you
got to learn how to work those tools but
then you got to remember that there's
different types of wood you've got Pine
which is very soft and you've got epe
which is very hard and then you've got
to learn how to work those tools on
those pieces of wood and then with human
beings as a leader mhm you got to
remember that each piece of wood is
different each piece of pine this one
has a knot and this one has a different
Bend to it so you've got to really pay
attention to balancing out these various
tools that you have because if you go
too hard on a piece of pine you'll
destroy it if you don't go hard enough
with a piece of epe you won't make any
impact so yeah what you're talking about
very true and this is what makes
leadership and just human interaction so
difficult because everyone is a little
bit different everyone is unique
and you still have the same tools it's
not something that I can't train you say
well you know every piece of wood is
different so therefore you just can't
it's just unmanageable no here's the
tools and you got to learn the art of
working on the hardwood versus softwood
and it's the same thing with leadership
like I can't give you the oh here's the
answer 100% of the time with all human
beings you do this yeah no actually
here's the range of tools that you can
utilize in those types of situations
from a leadership perspective and you've
got to figure out how much pressure to
apply what angle you're going to use and
it's going to be a little bit different
and that's why it takes experience and
it takes time but
unfortunately sometimes people think
that leadership is just something that
you're born with yeah or it's a set of
rules or rules it's like this is what
you're born with and you have these
capabilities and oh did you see that guy
give that speech and tell every what to
do man he was awesome yeah I could never
do that well no actually you can do that
and you can learn to become more
articulate you can learn how to have a
better command presence are you going to
have the same command presence that that
charming and charismatic individual had
Maybe not maybe you can't get there but
you can definitely improve and you can
definitely get better and then you can
bring someone on your team that has a
huge amount of Charisma maybe when it's
time to get up and and and shock the
troops into action you let that guy step
up because he's better than you so
that's well you see that in the story of
Moses which is a classic leadership
story Moses isn't verbal and tells God
that when God comes along and says like
well you're you're going to stand up
against tyranny and you're going to lead
the slaves out of captivity which is
what people are always doing in their
life if they have any sense moses' first
objection is well you know the the
tradition has it that he had a speech
impediment or something like that like
it's actually quite a severe impediment
so he has Aaron who's his Communicator
right and so you know you pointed to
something there people often assume that
leadership means charismatic speaking
for example well the kind of Public
Communication leadership that you and I
are doing depends on that but that's by
no means the only way of being an
effective leader I would I would say
it's probably much more akin to what
we've been talking about in terms of
Play It's like a good leader is someone
that who can continually create games
and present them to people that they
want to play and there's lots of ways of
doing that you can do that be quiet be
quiet like I had a I had a client a
lawyer he ran a big law firm in Toronto
um I worked with lawyers like that for
quite a while and they were sent to this
little organization I was part of the
value proposition to the law firms was
you send me your best people and we'll
work to make them 15% more productive
which for those people meant a lot right
but we work for them not you and so then
what we were doing with each of these
people was radically different it really
depended on the person and one of the
guys that really struck me he was very
very quiet and all he did in his office
all he did was go around and listen to
people and actually listen and so he
could get wind of interpersonal
conflicts of the sort you were
describing you know the power game
conflicts just before they were
developing right people would tell him
what was wrong and because he was
listening he could fix the things that
were wrong with just like a tap and a
nudge right because he did it before
they got out of control and it was
really interesting to watch him operate
because it really looked even to him
like he was doing very little as the
manager of this Law Firm but what he was
doing was exactly the right amount and
exactly the right time and he was doing
that because he was like and his
orientation was true he wanted the firm
to function as well as it possibly could
and that's genuinely what he wanted and
he didn't care whether
people he didn't even care
if he knew that what he was doing was
effective much less what other so
there's a gospel statement that's very
mysterious you shouldn't let your right
hand know what your left hand is doing
it's like well what does that mean it
means you shouldn't even be concerned
about whether you give yourself credit
for what you've accomplished you know
now there's a boundary on that because
credit where credit is due but if you're
undertaking the task just so that you
feel better about yourself in your own
eyes you're contaminating the motivation
the better motivation is this mentoring
motivation and I think it really is it's
a cause for optimism that that's such a
deep source of meaning you know because
you know as well as I do that there are
lots of young people will talk about
young men for a moment who feel lost
like where am I going to find the
meaning in my life and if you can let
people know that one of the deepest
possible sources of meaning that you can
tap that's more or less
un it's unfathomable right it never
stops giving is
the meaning that comes as a consequence
of working on behalf of the appropriate
development of other people yeah when
people come to me and they say well I
just don't I don't I don't know what to
do I don't know what my goals should be
I'm just kind of lost I always tell go
go go help other people right go help
other people like you'll find some
direction I don't care if you go down to
a soup kitchen or you go to a a boys
club where their kids need mentoring or
they need someone to teach them how to
throw a baseball or whatever the case
may be whatever you can do you go and
help people and and you're going to
you're going to find some direction
really quickly when you realize you're
just a little bit ahead of them in life
yeah and you can give them so much and
and that's going to be very powerful y
well so one of the things that
psychologists discovered although not
nearly enough has been made of this is
so imagine we've we've we've discovered
the basic dimensions of human
temperament extroversion positive
emotion neuroticism negative emotion
agreeableness so that's like say
aggression versus cooperation something
like that with the the attendant
problems on both ends conscientiousness
dutifulness orderliness industriousness
and creativity those are the five all
right so let's look at neuroticism
proclivity to feel negative emotion all
the negative emotions Clump together so
they have a common core it's probably
something like stop and leave something
like that right because if you're
threatened you should freeze or get the
hell out of there so that's the
core reaction around which all the
negative emotions are built and they all
associate okay we've been able to do
analysis of traits and attitudes that
are tightly associated with negative
emotion
self-consciousness is indistinguishable
from negative emotion which means like
it's
indistinguishable in fact in one of the
major person personality trait measures
called the neop one of the early Big
Five personality Dimensions
self-consciousness is a facet of
negative emotion that's how tight it is
it's the same thing so what it means is
and this is very gerain to your
point if you're thinking about yourself
you're miserable those are the same
thing and so then you might say well how
do you get out of that and you can't get
out of that by not thinking about
yourself that's just going to backfire
right so if you're anxious and you go to
a party and you think I'm not going to
think about myself and that's all you're
thinking about like you're you're
dead I used to treat my socially anxious
clients say go to a party and do
everything you can to make other people
feel
comfortable so that I would explain to
them what I just explained to you but I
would say that doesn't mean you can stop
thinking about yourself it means you can
start only thinking about what you can
provide to other people and that was
invariably an improvement on the
strategy that they had been using but
this this is so crucially important you
know because we are so reciprocal as
human beings that you are lost if you
only serve your own whims it doesn't
work in the long run it alienates people
it it produces A Life That's devoid of
meaning it makes you anxious and
isolated and it makes you self-conscious
and miserable and so it is the case as
we alluded to earlier that perversely
enough the best possible that you can do
for yourself all things considered over
the longest possible run is to work as
hard as you can on behalf of what's Best
in other people yeah and and you and I
talked about this the last time I forget
it was a couple years ago I think but I
was talking or you asked me what makes a
good seal like what makes a good seal
and and I said well it's doesn't matter
look you got to be a good shot of course
you got to be in good physical all those
things are important you got to you got
to be you got to have the skill set but
Far and Away what makes a good seal is
someone that puts the team before
themselves that's it that's the thing
and if you're the if Jordan if you're
the best shot you're the fastest you're
the strongest but you have yourself
above the team I don't want you in my
platoon and no one wants you in the
platoon that's the way it works so it
it's interesting that psychologically if
you're focused on yourself it's going to
cause problems either the problem of
egocentric arrogance or the problem of
like paranoia or what you just used to
describe it I mean when someone's just
focused on sciousness self-consciousness
that's the thing that I when I see
people that are self-conscious I was
like hey you know who notices that you
have a zit on your cheek right now you
no one else cares yeah no one else cares
no one's it doesn't matter when you walk
into a room and you feel like you don't
have the experience to be in a
leadership position the person that's
thinking that is you it doesn't really
matter now if you go in and try and
overcompensate by for that by saying
listen I just graduated from college and
I really know how to this stuff you're
going to get crushed yeah because you're
trying to make up for the fact that you
actually don't know what you're doing
and no one everyone knows you don't you
just got here so we we know you don't
know what you're doing but we don't
really care about it we don't see we
just care if you think you know what
you're doing more than you actually know
then it's a problem yeah then that's
definitely a problem and that whole
thing about the authoritarian
mindset and I I I did this series of
podcasts about this book called the
psychology of military and comp
and and they have these authoritarian
people and when they look at the
military they think they're they're
they're like oh yeah you get that in the
police too yep you get it in the police
you get it in law enforcement you get
these people that have that
authoritarian mindset they see what it
looks like from the outside and they
think oh this is going to be awesome
this is where I belong yeah and so they
go and everyone's going to wear a
uniform they're going to have to call me
sir they're going to have to obey what I
say it's like a dream for them Y and in
non combat situations those people can
perform pretty well because we're on the
parade field I need everyone in the same
uniform I'm going to inspect your
barracks rooms uh I'm going to make sure
that you follow my orders as soon as
they're given that's like a beautiful
place for that authoritarian mindset is
a non-combat situation but you put those
people in combat and now all of a sudden
there there's literally no rules anymore
there's very small number of rules and
now you have to deal with you know
Jordan who listened to me when we were
on the parade field but now he's scared
to death that he's going to die and he's
not listening to me anymore now what do
I do how do I he has reason to be scared
he has reason to be scared so you would
see and I got to see this a lot inside
the military the people that had the
authoritarian mindset the closed
mindset they had real problems when you
put them into combat situations where
there's Mayhem and chaos and they can no
longer control it and they freak out
because of that it's a real problem well
yeah well like you said the I don't
think there's a better definition of
Chaos than than Warfare like obviously
that's a place where the rules are
suspended so then the question would be
well what's the best possible mindset to
bring to bear on a situation where the
rules have been suspended right you can
certainly see that distribution of
responsibility
and an appeal to volunteerism is going
to be of great utility under those not
least so you don't get shot in the back
by your own man yeah yeah and then the
the creativity aspect right because all
of a sudden there's no
rules and or there's very limited amount
of rules and if we've got to find out a
different way to execute these missions
that's going to make more sense in this
particular environment that we're in
that no book and no training has
prepared us for you know I got asked a
little while ago about well you know if
we were going to war with
China and I was leading you know my
troops into combat what would I be
thinking about and and I said the thing
I would be focused on the same thing I'm
always focused on especially going into
a combat situation and that is keeping
an open mind mhm because I don't know
what's going to
happen the enemy doesn't know what's
going to happen I don't know exactly how
my troops are going to react I don't
even know how I'm going to react and if
I get fixed a fixed mindset where I'm
saying this is what we're going to do
and this is how it's going to be as soon
as that combat starts that that you can
throw that thing out the window and now
if I have a closed mind I fall apart if
I have an open mind I look around and
say okay I see some adaptations we make
right now here's what we need to do
here's some adjustments we can make and
that's what when I ran training that was
the purpose of my training was to open
people's minds was to put them in
situations where if they stuck with a
fixed mindset and they didn't open their
mind and they didn't see other
perspectives they were going to fall
apart they're going to get so that other
perspective so that's got to be allied
with that willingness to incorporate
information from the bottom up because
you're going to get so that's where the
diversity claims of the radical left
have some utility is like well well in
in any open-ended situation you want a
genuine diversity of
viewpoints
because this situation is Shifting and
the more options you have in front of
you up to some limited degree because
you know time to process all those
options also matters you don't want a
uniform uniformity of opinion because
you're going to run into this problem
that you just described here's a good
example the Iraq military right it's
it's basically a cast system you had the
officers at top and then you had a bunch
of you know almost almost slave labor a
little bit
yeah and the officers would skim money
off the paychecks of the soldiers right
that's how they operated right and
there's a loyalty building exercise for
you not the best loyalty building
exercise at all and so so so the rule is
don't rip off armed subordinates how's
that for a rule here's the thing that's
interesting so our chain of command
found out that this was happening and
there was a lot of pressure throughout
the US military like we've got to stop
this these soldiers are getting ripped
off this is terrible we need to
prosecute the officers that are skimming
money from the
paychecks so I went and talked to like
brought my interpreter and we go talk to
the soldiers yeah yeah yeah and you say
like hey is it true that your boss is
skimming money off your paycheck like
ready to write it down and let they go
well of course he's the boss of course
he's going to take some of the money I
mean that's sort of what we you know
that's totally normal they weren't they
weren't they weren't angry about it they
were just like oh yeah well he's the
boss he's going to take some money and
then when I get promoted I'll be able to
take money that's the way their system
functions uhuh and it was see I jumped
to the wrong conclusion that investment
that was my conclusion too cuz I was a
young enlisted guy and if my officer
would been steing my money I would have
been totally against it but that was a
very normal thing
and so we I I kind of try to back off
and say like this is the way their
culture is that's the way their culture
is it's different than ours it's
unacceptable were there parameters of
skimming yeah there are there's there's
parameters of skimming right so you
could take some percent yes yes and it's
the same thing with the Iraqis we'd say
Hey you know we're going on a on an
operation tonight we've got an operation
tonight can you bring 30 guys tonight to
conduct this operation and they would
tell you 100% of the time yeah yeah yep
and they'd show up with nine or they'
show up with six or they'd show up with
48 and because it's in Shah right it's
God willing we'll have 30 people if
that's the way it's supposed to be
that's the way it'll be and instead of
us going hey this isn't the way we do it
we had to say okay well how do they
operate what do they think like how can
we incorporate their perspective on
things into our culture and how can we
merge these cultures together so that we
can communicate with them in an
effective way so we go okay cool how
many people do you think you can bring
tonight and they're going to give you a
better answer than if you say can you
bring this many it's a it's a little
Nuance in the way that you interact with
them right but if you that might have
even been a politeness Norm e because
their their response to you might have
been well the polite thing is to tell
the person who's asking what they want
to hear right and that is different than
saying well how many people do you think
you could bring to totally different
yeah yeah so if I had a fixed mindset
and a closed mind it would have been say
this is the military a platoon is 40
guys we you need bring a platoon tonight
if you don't bring a platoon the world
explodes right nothing's going to work
but the different the the the
open-minded attitude is like oh they
think a little bit different than we do
hey how many people can you bring and
all of a sudden okay you can bring 12
okay then we'll bring 18 and we'll have
30 we'll be able to get this thing done
we'll make it happen but when when we
have a closed mind we don't hear other
people's perspective it's it's actually
insane there I've seen people we have
intelligence come in in information come
in and just be like no that that's just
shut it off as if it doesn't exist
instead of saying oh well at a minimum
where' that information come from right
I might not agree with that information
but we've got someone telling us that
there's uh a Machine Gun Nest in this
location no that's impossible yeah I
I've heard people say those people do
that in their own marriages all the time
it's totally ridiculous so to put your
ego in check and say oh that person
might understand or this intelligence
May come from a place something that I
don't understand or I don't know about
let me open my mind and at least ask
some questions about it and we're seeing
this in in the political world right now
right the divisiveness in the country is
like oh I'm right you're wrong therefore
everything that you say I don't listen
to anything that you say and that's the
way it is and end of conversation I
don't want to hear anything that you
have to say which is a real problem
instead of having conversations with
people and trying to understand what
your perspective is crazy as it may seem
to me I still have to listen to what you
have to say and try and integrate that
into especially true when you have to
live I I was on Bill Mars Show at one
point and it was me and a bunch of
people who were at least under the
current circumstances more liberal than
me and they were going off on Trump and
the and the magot types and I brought
the conversation to a halt by asking
them how that attitude essentially of
contempt that they brought to bear on
the situation was going to serve them
given that that was 50% of the
population and they're going to have to
live with them right and
so this this Arc thing that we've put
together in London the alliance for
responsible citizenship one of the rules
that we're attempting to
implement we're afraid that any
Enterprise
that's International Visionary let's say
will have a proclivity to turn into
something authoritarian and like no time
flap you could make a cool movie about
that well no kidding The Arc goes wild
well no kidding absolutely um we're one
of our principles is that any policy
that you have to implement by
manipulation or force is at minimum
suboptimal right that you need voluntary
Buy in and that that's something like
consent of the government but I also
think that it's it's it's more just a
council of wisdom because it's a lot
easier to lead
people where they want to go and it's
really incumbent it's kind of a
definition of leadership you know is
that you have to find out where people
want to
go and you should assume that maybe they
have the reasons for the decisions that
they made and then you can help them
strategize about how that might be
undertaken and what their respective
roles might be as very useful as well to
give not to give them something that's
important to do but to encourage them to
take on something important to do and
then to back the hell
off so they they can do it right no
better tool than leadership than giving
people ownership of what they're doing
you know the the classic in the military
is I don't say hey Jordan here's the
mission here's the people I want you to
take here's the weapons I want you to
use here's the vehicles I want you to
bring here's how I want you to assault
the building here's the time I want you
to hit the target here's the time I want
you to the rout the route I want you to
take to get back here and here's what
time I want you to to do the debrief so
so take ownership of that and go execute
that doesn't work yeah what we want to
do in a decentralized organization is
say hey Jordan here's the target you got
hit tonight right right yeah go figure
out how you want to do it y yeah and if
you're a good leader then you turn to
your team and you say hey guys here's
the target we got hit tonight how do you
think we should do this and all of a
sudden you have ownership over this and
how do you how do you how do you
negotiate agreement on the original
Target well that's the thing is if you
say to me hey jonco why do you want to
hit that Target I should be able to say
well we found out that that's the node
that's been making explosive devices
that been that's been hitting all over
our bases here's our prioritization
rationale you say cool got it
occasionally and I can't be afraid of
this occasionally you say hey jco why
are we hitting that Target and I
say I'm not sure right that's not good
that's not good at all in fact that's
that's to me you know what let me go
find out right definitely and also
occasionally I might say well we want to
hit the target because we've been
getting bombed and we don't we want that
to stop and this is the node that's been
making these explosives and you might
say to me
hey the the road that you want us to go
down to hit this target has had roadside
bombs on it every day and there's no
other entry in there I don't think we
should do this and then what should I
say I should say oh I did not know that
right and then it's up the chain of
command how can we find another way to
prosecute this target uhuh and because I
listen to you now when I come back and
say hey actually we did some analysis we
are going to get you some helicopters
you're not going to have to drive down
the road here's how Here's the the new
tools you have and you say great and so
we move forward down the path
not by me dictating to you and not by
you protesting and calling me an idiot
but by us having a relationship and
working together to figure out the best
solution to the problem you can never be
afraid as a leader to to not know the
answer to say like well I'm actually not
sure about that let me find out people
are scared of that people are scared of
when when someone on their team raises
their hand and says hey boss why are we
doing
this a lot of times their response is
because I told you to yeah right we say
that to our kids which is a terrible
answer even for your kids even for your
kids the the the answer should be well
let me explain it to you and by the way
clean your room why I've I've had this
with a thousand parents why should I
clean my room and there are some wise
right you can say well you know if we
have a fire and the firemen come in here
and you got toys all over the floor you
Tripp and fall and it could be a real
problem and your kid might buy that
right they might buy that but they might
be like low probability yeah low low
probability I'm not cleaning the room
and it serly if you don't really have a
good answer yeah okay well if you want
your laundry done at a minimum you got
to put your clothes in the hamper other
than that you can leave the Tonka to and
and you think that well then you're
creating this undisciplined child no
actually you're giving your child the
ability to learn from themselves three
days later when they want to go to
school and they can't find their Tonka
truck it's like where's my Tonka truck
well it's somewhere in your
room where'd you put it yeah I don't
know so giving thinking that your kid is
going to just
uh devolve into this Savage human being
that's can't can't uh undisciplined
throughout their life is is the wrong
answer well you you you highlighted
something there that's also of extreme
importance from a leadership perspective
too which is the refusal to make rules
to make unnecessary rules a good
leadership what would you say set of
principles is not too many rules but
enforcement of the rules of the min
minimal set of rules that do exist and
then you might say well how do you know
what the appropriate rules are and one
answer to that would be well if you
don't have a series of deep reasons for
your rule and it it boils down to
because I said so that's probably not a
rule that you are in a position to to
advance or or or insist upon yeah you
need it needs to be placed in a exactly
as you said in the military situation
here's a Target here's the cost to
attempting to hit that Target which is
not a trivial cost at all the right
response on the part of the men is well
why is that worth the cost and so
they're going to reflect that back to
you unless you have enough reasons
behind that strategy to eliminate their
concerns at least compared to any other
plan they might come up with their
appropriate response in some ways is to
not they're certainly not going to be
enthusiastic about the mission they're
certainly not going to think well this
clearly needs to be done yep and there's
situations in Vietnam war is a great
time to talk about this because there
are situations where I said Jordan you
got to go execute this yeah and you said
why and I said well because it's coming
from higher ups yeah and you go okay
boss got it and you take your Patrol 100
meters outside the wire you sit in the
bushes for for 6 hours you come back and
you say yeah boss we tried we didn't we
didn't see anything out there right but
you didn't execute anything you were
supposed to execute right right right
definitely definitely so understanding
why you're doing what you're doing
absolutely critical and yeah from a
governmental perspective well those
explanations also give people the option
to think on their feet when they're
actually in the complex situation
because if you've provided them with
five rationals for this Target and then
things go astray they still have those
five rationals to build new targets out
of right so that's why they need to be
informed yep and being able to admit
when you're wrong about something and
being able to say you know I actually
the last Target we hit that you pushed
back against and I told you just do it
you you were right and I was wrong we
shouldn't hit that Target that's okay
and you don't see this from politicians
at all you don't ever hear a politician
say yeah you know what I was thinking at
the time was wrong and here's my
adjustment and here's where what I want
to do moving forward it was kind of
ridiculous during covid the way those
things just piled up that's for sure it
was ridiculous yeah well that's you know
part of that I would say and and maybe
we should close with this part of that
was likely the fact that there was a
decision made very early on that it was
okay to compel people by force as soon
as as soon as I'll tell you it maybe
this is a good closing this is
cool there's a scene in Exodus I did
this Exodus seminar recently and we're
talking about leadership so this makes
this is perfectly appropriate so Moses
is an archetypal leader right he's
leading people away from tyranny and
away from their own slavery right and so
and every leader does that when you're
trying to make people autonomous you're
trying to lead them away from their own
slavery when you're trying to help
inform them that they shouldn't be using
power you're trying to lead them away
from tyranny okay so Moses does a pretty
damn good job of this and he's got his
people right to the edge of the promised
land and this taken 40 years right it's
taken his whole bloody life right and so
they're still in the desert they're lost
they're wandering they're still in the
desert but the promised land is at hand
and they're out of water and so
Israelites start bitching and whining
about this they come to Moses and Moses
they say go talk to God because you're
in with him and God
says ask these rocks to deliver water
for your people and they'll deliver
water and so Moses listens but then when
he goes to the Rocks he hits them with
his staff he uses Authority uses power
twice bang bang right when he was told
to ask and so the Rocks deliver one
water and the Israelites are no longer
parched but God punishes Moses by
telling him that he will now die before
he enters the promised land and so it's
an extremely interesting twist it's a
very short part of the story but Moses
throughout his leadership career uses ex
excessive force a number of times it's
his
weakness and it's despite the fact that
he sacrifices for 40 years and is
probably the most effective leader in
the entire Old Testament
Corpus he's stopped from attaining his
highest goal because he relies on Force
right yep right I say constantly to lead
with the minimum force required right
right this is a course of term when
you're interacting with a potential
prisoner you want to use the minimal
Force required to subdue them Y and it's
the same thing as a leader of human
beings you want to lead with the minimum
force require
hopefully hopefully in an ideal world
that's nothing right my team knows what
to do they know what the goal is and
they can move there hey occasionally do
you as a leader have to step in and say
hey everyone we got to make a change
this is where we're going yes you
occasionally have to do that you want
that to be as rare as possible and what
you really want is you want people
stepping up and moving because they know
the direction that we're heading well
that's a great place to end and so thank
you very much it's always a pleasure
talking to you always indeed we were
going to cover a lot of topics today
that we didn't cover but I'm very happy
that we covered the topics that we did
cover for everybody who's watching and
listening most of you know this already
but I'll point it out anyways I'm going
to continue talking to Joo for another
half an hour on the daily wire plus side
I think I'm going to talk to him about
the political situation that surrounds
us at the moment in relationship to
leadership we'll talk about Biden we'll
talk about Trump um more from the
psychological and philosophical
perspective and uh so if you you want to
join us for that please do it's I always
think it's uh useful at least in
principle to throw some support behind
the daily wire plus team um they're
doing a good job on the Free Speech
front as far as I'm concerned and so and
they facilitate these conversations and
that's been very useful to me and
hopefully to all of you as well so thank
you Joo very good to see you again to
everybody watching and listening thank
you for your time and attention the
daily Weare plus people in the film crew
here thanks for your help ciao
[Music]